# Kaapi with Kuriosity lecture

__Title:__ "Automating Mathematics?"

## Abstract

Starting with just the rules of chess, it took four hours of playing against itself for AlphaZero, a computer program, to become the strongest chess player on the planet, playing with a "dynamic, open style" and preferring moves that are "risky and aggressive". With a couple of days of self-play, AlphaZero discovered the best standard openings, and even discarded a few of them. Could a future computer program, starting with adding and multiplying natural numbers, discover the mysteries of the primes?

We discuss the many recent developments that point to such a future. These range from the phenomenal advances in Artificial Intelligence, to advances in the foundations of mathematics, to mathematical proofs making trains safer.

## Bio

Siddhartha Gadgil is a Professor of Mathematics at the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore. He has a Ph.D. from California Institute of Technology and a B. Stat. degree from Indian Statistical Institute, Calcutta. Before joining I.I.Sc., he was a postdoc at Stony Brook University and on the faculty of Indian Statistical Institute, Bangalore.

Siddhartha began his research career in Topology and has worked for many years in this and related fields such as Geometric group theory and Riemannian geometry. He has also applied topology to study Molecular Biology. In recent years the main focus of his work has been Automated Theorem Proving, i.e., mathematics generated by computers.

## Outline

* The Quest: table with Chess, Go, Mathematics
* Mathematics
  * prime numbers
  * three questions: infinitude, twin primes, arithmetic progressions
  * why: concepts
  * example: Curvature and Relativity
* Puzzles (and Games)
  * Solution (answer with justification) hard to find, easy to check.
  * Examples: jigsaw, Sudoku, Rubik's cube, detective stories, orbits of planets.
  * formal and informal solutions.
* Reasoning for puzzles
  * deductive/algorithmic: small number of steps following a small number of rules (which may depend on a small number of parameters).
  * intuition
    * not deductive
    * based on experience
    * correct often enough to be useful: a _hunch_ is sometimes correct, a _judgement_ is usually correct.
  * checking a solution must be deductive, but finding one efficiently involves a mix of deduction and intuition.
  * tacit knowledge and expert systems

* Mathematical proof: justification of a mathematical statement.
  * based on the rules of logic.
  * rules of logic are sound (and complete).
  * so far as we know, they are also consistent, and can express everything in the real world.
* Infinitude of primes
  * informal proof
  * formal proof.
* Games and computers
  * teaching a computer to play chess
    * given reward
    * derive value (likely reward), policy (likely to maximize value)
  * deep Blue vs Kasparov
  * the tradeoff and Go
  * AlphaGo vs Lee Seedol and Ke Jie
  * AlphaGoZero
  * AlphaZero in chess
  * conclusions of reasoning
* GQNs and composition/analogy : factorizes colour, shape and size.
* Computer mathematical proofs
  * four colour problem
  * Robins conjecture
  * Kepler conjecture
  * Pythogorean triples
  * About these:
    * deductive, often domain specific
    * not "solutions" - not easy to verify, hence learn from.
* Interactive theorem provers
  * verify and complete proofs
  * trusted kernel
  * can have significant automation
  * used in formal methods
* Formal methods
  * Some errors: Pentium bug, TimSort, Pegasus attack on WhatsApp
  * Escaped extensive testing as they are in corner cases
  * Still matter
    * safety critical
    * vulnerability
  * __Solution:__
    * Mathematically prove correctness, with the help of and verified by computers
    * This is facilitated by better foundations: allowing composition.
* Where we are:
  * computers purely deductively can still better human mixed approach, but with the cost of proofs not useful to learn from.
  * some deep learning has been used together with these.
  * but in other domains, AI shows intuition, _originality_ and _analogical/compositional thinking_
* Conclusion: Open AI.

## Notes

### Mizar version of the formalization

__Credit:__ Markus Wenzel and Freek Wiedijk

Here is the final part of a Mizar formalization of the ‘romantic proof’.
The full Mizar formalization is 44 lines long. It builds on the Mizar
Mathematical Library (http://mizar.org/JFM/), which is part of the
Mizar system. Here we have used Mizar version 6.1.10.

```mizar
reserve n,p for Nat;
theorem Euclid: ex p st p is prime & p > n
proof
set k = n! + 1;
n! > 0 by NEWTON:23;
then n! >= 0 + 1 by NAT_1:38;
then k >= 1 + 1 by REAL_1:55;
then consider p such that
A1: p is prime & p divides k by INT_2:48;
A2: p <> 0 & p > 1 by A1,INT_2:def 5;
take p;
thus p is prime by A1;
assume p <= n;
then p divides n! by A2,NAT_LAT:16;
then p divides 1 by A1,NAT_1:57;
hence contradiction by A2,NAT_1:54;
end;
theorem {p: p is prime} is infinite
from Unbounded(Euclid);
```